BASQUE TABLES — HOW TO WRITE A RECORD

THE FIVE TIERS
  cited        a named source in data/sources/sources.json says it, and it was read on the
               date that source carries.
  harvested    taken from a directory row or a listing. Fine for an address and a phone
               number. Not fine on its own for whether a room is open tonight.
  tradition    what the trade says, with no source that tests it. Legitimate, and labelled.
  inference    reasoning from other records here. Say so.
  field        seen in person.

  Record-level `provenance` is the default. Any block — address, founded, status, seating,
  picon, prices, hours, etymology, x_kitchen, a section — may carry its own `tier` and
  `source`, and that wins for that block.

WHAT MAY NEVER BE SOFT
  seating · picon · prices · hours · status · address may not carry tier tradition or
  inference. validate.py returns 1 if they do. Somebody drives to these.

HOURS — THREE STATES
  "hours": {"open": ["Tue","Wed"], "closed": ["Mon"], "text": "...", "tier": "cited",
            "source": "...", "checked": "2026-09-16"}
  Days in neither list are NOT PUBLISHED. They draw as a dashed square, they are excluded
  from "open today", and they are never counted as open or closed. Guessing a closure is
  worse than a blank, because a reader drives on it.

SEATING — THE FIELD THE SITE IS BUILT AROUND
  kind: shared | own | both | bar | unknown
    shared   a long table, with strangers
    own      your own table
    both     the house does both, and the note says when
    bar      a counter
    unknown  nobody published it. Not a guess, not a default.
  Also: reservations (required | taken | walk-in | unknown), a note in the house's own
  words where possible, tier, source, checked.

PRICES
  Only what a house prints. items[] carries the dish and the dollars as printed;
  dinner_low and dinner_high bound the dinner entrees; `includes` says what the price
  carries with it. Never convert, never average, never estimate.

X_KITCHEN
  How the house describes its own kitchen, in its own words, with a source. This is how
  the directory distinguishes a Basque boarding house from a Spanish tapas bar without
  ranking either. Quote; do not adjudicate.

KIN
  kin[] is directional prose: "what the neighbour is to THIS page". The site prints the
  neighbour's reply on the same card when the neighbour points back. Write both sides
  when you can; a one-way link still renders, as "points here".

NEEDS_VERIFICATION
  A list of plain sentences naming what is not settled. They all surface on /gaps/.
  Preferred over a confident guess, always.

HOUSE STYLE
  · Describe. Do not rank. validate.py refuses "authentic", "purist", "touristy",
    "hidden gem", "the real deal" and the rest in our own prose — a source may use any of
    them inside a quotation, we may not.
  · It also refuses this project's banned words: "load-bearing", "honest", and the
    food-writing filler ("nestled", "iconic", "eatery", "boasts", "elevated", "curated").
  · Active verbs. Fewer adjectives. A noun is a noun — Sources is "Sources", not "Where
    this came from".
  · If you want a blurb, the record is missing a field.
  · Never declare what the site stands for. Print the fields and let the reader decide.

THE CAST — what has a record, and what does not yet
  Rooms: 13 California, 8 Nevada, 7 Idaho. Ten of the 28 are a directory row and nothing
  more; their status reads "not established" and they are held out of the filters.
  Missing and worth writing: Bar Gernika's opening times (the house publishes only closing
  times), dinner prices anywhere but Bakersfield, the Picon question at almost every bar,
  a person record for the Erreguible and Artiach families, an event record for the
  Sheepherders' Ball, and the National Basque Festival at Elko.

ADDING A PHRASE
  data/vocab/phrases.json, in the group it belongs to: eu, say (an approximation for an
  English ear), en, and use (when you would actually say it). It appears on /say/ and
  joins the pool that is dealt out as callouts. Nothing else to wire up.

ADDING A SOURCE
  Put it in data/sources/sources.json with title, publisher, url, kind and the date you
  read it. The validator refuses a record that cites an id the registry does not hold.
